When it comes to the most popular music genre of today’s generation, hip/hop, there is
one artist whose alternative style stands out amongst the rest. This artist is none other than Tyler
the Creator. Tyler the Creator is an American rapper, record producer, director, fashion designer,
and the head of his own independent record label, Odd Future Records (Vogue). He is
infamously known for his alternative style of music, fashion style, and overall persona.
Before deep diving into what makes Tyler’s work alternative lets first define what
alternative media is. Alternative media is “media sources that differ from established or
dominant types of media in terms of their content, production, or distribution (Wikipedia).” For
example, someone who would be considered a much more traditional rap or hip/hop artist could
be someone like Drake. Drake is known for his mainstream and traditional rap music that has
elevated him to the top of the rap game. If we were to say Drake is the cornerstone of normal
media in todays hip/hop genre than Tyler is most definitely on the oppositive end of the
spectrum.
Tyler came on to the music stage in 2009 when he released his first solo mixtape
“Bastard” and his first studio album “Goblin” later in 2011. Both musical productions
highlighted Tyler’s alternative persona using dark abrasive lyrics some of which were even
criticized as being harmful or hateful. His beats on both projects were viewed as extremely raw

and confrontational which was a stark contrast to the polished sound of mainstream rap music.
Although some said his music was offensive and confrontational, others saw it as a reflection of
the dark side of youth culture and the frustrations of young people.
After Goblin, Tyler’s music evolved dramatically, his subsequent albums including Wolf,
Cherry Bomb and Flower Boy, allowed Tyler to show his introspective and experimental side of
his artistry. With this evolution his beats became much more layered and complex. They
included elements of jazz, funk, and soul. Tyler also found himself moving away from just dark
themes and introduced themes of love, vulnerability, and self-discovery. These projects
showcased a much more polished and nuanced perspective. Despite these changes in style
Tyler’s continued to refuse to conform to the likes of a traditional rapper. When listening to his
music you will often hear very unconventional instruments and sounds such as animal noises,
sirens, screaming and distorted vocals. His lyricism continued to be extremely cryptic in nature
and was filled with metaphorical and twisted imagery. An example of this could be found in
some of his recent music from his album IGOR. The song “New Magic Wand” right away starts
off with distorted vocals and cryptic lyrics. It is filled with strange siren noises and distortion in
the background. I truly believe this song highlights Tyler’s unique style in the fact that from the
sound of the person rapping you would have absolutely no idea who it was. However, Tyler’s
fans would be able to easily recognize this alternative style and know right away that it was one
of their favorite artist’s music.
Not only is Tyler’s music seen as extremely alternative, but his music videos are also
very alternative. He often has crazy themes and outfits in his music videos that seem to have
nothing to do with the lyrics he is spitting out. A great example of this is in one of Tyler’s most
infamous songs “EARFQUAKE.” In the video Tyler appears on stage in a very out of the

ordinary outfit and wig. He than proceeds to perform on a burning stage with once again very
cryptic and unconventional messages and lyricism. He also has his patented sounds and synths
that he uses throughout the song that would be extremely unconventional to any other artist.

(Billboard Tyler the Creator EARFQUAKE)

Above is a picture of Tyler in his outfit for the Earfquake music video.
Tyler’s alternative style is also extremely evident in his persona and visual aesthetic. He
is often seen wearing bold and colorful outfits that defy gender norms and goes against the
traditional masculine perception. He has historically worn skirts, crop tops, and flamboyant suits.
As stated before his personally directed music videos also capsulate his alternative style through
their surreal and visually stunning elements of fantasy.
Tyler’s influence also extends past his music and style. He has been an outspoken
advocate for mental health awareness through incorporating themes of anxiety and depression
into his lyrics. He has also been a vocal supporter of LGBTQ+ rights and has often incorporated
themes supporting his stance through his lyrics and visuals.
Through his alternative style Tyler has created a lasting impact on a new generation of
artists who have adopted his unorthodox approach to hip/hop. Several artists such as
Brockhampton, Earl Sweatshirt, and Vince Staples have all stated that Tyler has been a major

influence in their musical careers and how he had broken musical barriers with his alternative
style. It will be interesting to see what other artists inspired by Tyler will come on to the scene
and continue to influence an alternative style on the next generation of music. I am eager to see
what’s next that’s for sure!
